blog: add blog on kyverno deleting policy (#2037)
kyverno/website: src/content/blog/deleting-policy/index.md

---
date: 2026-05-26
title: DeletingPolicy - Let Kyverno Clean Up After Your Cluster
tags:
  - General
authors:
  - name: Kirti Goyal

> excerpt: A practical guide to DeletingPolicy in Kyverno like automatically cleaning up completed Jobs, stale pods, expired Secrets, and anything else that's overstayed its welcome in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: A practical guide to DeletingPolicy in Kyverno: Clean up completed Jobs, stale pods, expired Secrets, and anything else that's overstayed its welcome in a cluster.
```

draft: false
---

Kubernetes clusters accumulate junk. Not because teams are careless but because

> that's how distributed systems work at scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it's hard to keep up with all of the changes, adjustments, and resource allocations when working with distributed systems at scale.
```

> A Job runs, completes successfully, and sits there forever. Test pods from last

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often times, a Job runs, completes successfully, and then sits finished forever. Test pods from last
```

sprint are still running. Secrets that expired three months ago are still in the

> cluster. ConfigMaps from features that shipped two years ago. Nobody deleted them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster. ConfigMaps from features that shipped two years ago are still hanging out in your cluster like a family member that has overstayed their welcome and continues to consume your food and energy. Nobody deleted them
```

> because nobody remembered they existed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because life moved on and people became use to having them there. Sometimes, they even forget they ever existed.
```

Without a plan for cleanup, clusters slowly fill with resources that serve no

> purpose. They eat memory in the API server, clutter kubectl get output, and make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
purpose other than to eat memory in the API server, clutter `kubectl get`output, and make
```

it harder to understand what's actually running.

DeletingPolicy is the answer. It wakes up on a schedule, scans the cluster, finds

> what matches the conditions, and deletes it. Cleanup becomes automatic instead of manual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what matches established conditions, and deletes anything that is no longer serving a purpose making clean-up automatic instead of manual.
```

> ## How DeletingPolicy is different from all the others

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How DeletingPolicy is different from the other Kyverno policy types
```

> Every other Kyverno policy type reacts to something happening right now like a resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every other Kyverno policy type is triggered by something happening or needing to happen within a set of resources.
```

> being created, updated, or applied. They sit in the admission path and evaluate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, the other Kyverno policy types help create, update, or apply changes to resources according to the guidelines and guardrails established by each team. They sit in the admission path and evaluate
```

requests as they come in.

> DeletingPolicy doesn't do any of that. It's not in the admission path at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, DeletingPolicy doesn't do any of that. 
```

> It runs on a cron schedule. At a specific time, it wakes up, looks at what already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather, DeletingPolicy runs on a scheduler similar to a cron job. At a specific time, it wakes up, looks at what already
```

> exists in the cluster, and deletes anything that meets its conditions. Nobody has to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exists in the cluster, and deletes anything that doesn't meet the conditions established in the policy to ensure that stale resources are eliminated in a timely and automated way. Nobody has to
```

trigger it. Nobody has to remember. It just runs by itself.

Think of it like a janitor that comes in every night, checks what's expired or
abandoned, and quietly removes it. You walk in the next morning to a clean cluster.

## The anatomy of a DeletingPolicy

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.kyverno.io/v1
kind: DeletingPolicy
metadata:
  name: your-policy-name
spec:
  schedule: '0 2 * * *' # when to run (cron format)
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['batch']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        operations: ['*']
        resources: ['jobs'] # which resource type to scan
  conditions:
    - name: condition-name
      expression: 'CEL expression that must be true to delete'
```

Three fields that matter:

- `schedule`: This is standard cron format. This controls when the policy runs.

- `matchConstraints`: It tells which resources to scan. Same pattern as every other policy
  type, but here it's not about incoming requests, rather it's about existing resources in
  the cluster.

- `conditions`: the filter that determines which of those resources actually get

>   deleted. Only resources where this CEL expression evaluates to true get removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  deleted. Only resources where this CEL expression evaluates to `true` get removed.
```

  This is the most important field to get right.

## Reading cron expressions

Here's the pattern for cron syntax:

```text
┌─ minute (0-59)
│  ┌─ hour (0-23)
│  │  ┌─ day of month (1-31)
│  │  │  ┌─ month (1-12)
│  │  │  │  ┌─ day of week (0-6, Sunday=0)
│  │  │  │  │
*  *  *  *  *
```

Common patterns used in practice:

```yaml
schedule: '0 2 * * *'      # every day at 2 AM
schedule: '0 0 * * 0'      # every Sunday at midnight
schedule: '*/30 * * * *'   # every 30 minutes
schedule: '0 2 * * 1-5'    # weekdays at 2 AM
```

> Minimum granularity is 1 minute. Can't go finer than that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Minimum granularity is 1 minute.**
```

## Use case 1: Clean up completed Jobs

> This is the most common **DeletingPolicy**. Jobs that have finished running have no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most common `DeletingPolicy`. Jobs that have finished running have no
```

kind: DeletingPolicy
metadata:
  name: cleanup-completed-jobs
spec:
  schedule: '0 2 * * *' # every day at 2 AM
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['batch']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        operations: ['*']
        resources: ['jobs']
  conditions:
    - name: is-completed
      expression: >
        object.status.conditions.exists(c,
          c.type == 'Complete' && c.status == 'True'
        )
```

Every night at 2 AM, Kyverno scans all Jobs in the cluster. Any Job with `Complete: True` in its status conditions gets deleted. This policy doesn't touch running jobs, it only cleans up completed ones.

**Verify the policy was applied:**

```bash
kubectl get deletingpolicy
```

Expected output:

```text
NAME                     AGE
cleanup-completed-jobs   10s
```

**Check deletion events after the schedule runs:**

```bash
kubectl get events --field-selector reason=PolicyApplied -A
```

This shows deletion events generated by Kyverno cleanup policies. Each event tells exactly which policy deleted which resource and when.

## Use case 2: Clean up stale test pods

Developers spin up pods in test namespaces and later forget about them. This policy

> cleans them up automatically but only in test namespaces, and only pods that have

Reviewer: Add some context around the use case. What is the issue with test pods being left and forgotten about? Why is this an issue for teams? What is the reason (business reason / workflow reason) that teams need this policy?

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.kyverno.io/v1
kind: DeletingPolicy
metadata:
  name: cleanup-old-test-pods
spec:
  schedule: '0 1 * * *' # daily at 1 AM
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        operations: ['*']
        resources: ['pods']
        scope: 'Namespaced'
    namespaceSelector:
      matchLabels:
        environment: test # only runs in namespaces labeled environment=test
  conditions:
    - name: isOld
      expression: >
        has(object.metadata.labels.old) &&
        object.metadata.labels.old == 'true'
```

Two layers of protection here:

- `namespaceSelector` scopes the policy to namespaces labeled `environment: test`.
  Production namespaces are completely untouched, the policy can't reach them.

- `conditions` further filters to only pods explicitly labeled `old: true`. So a developer
  labels their test pod when they're done with it, and Kyverno cleans it up at 1 AM.

This is the right pattern for DeletingPolicy on real clusters. Basically scope tightly, then
add conditions. Never let a cleanup policy roam the entire cluster without a tight filter.

## Use case 3: Remove expired Secrets

> Temporary credentials should have a short life. This policy deletes any Secret that has

Reviewer: Add a bit of explanation around why Secrets/temporary credentials should have a short life. What happens if they don't? What dangers/risks are there when they become stale? Why do teams need to worry about this?

spec:
  schedule: '0 2 * * *'
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
      - apiGroups: ['batch']
        apiVersions: ['v1']
        resources: ['jobs']
  conditions:
    - name: completed-jobs
      expression: >
        object.status.conditions.exists(c,
          c.type == 'Complete' && c.status == 'True'
        )
```

This is scoped entirely to the `production` namespace. The team owns this policy and can manage it themselves.

## `deletionPropagationPolicy` (what happens to dependent resources)

When Kyverno deletes a resource, what happens to the things that depend on it?

- `Background` (default) — the parent resource is deleted immediately. The Kubernetes
  garbage collector handles dependent resources in the background afterward. Fastest.

- `Foreground` — the parent resource stays until all dependent resources are deleted
  first. Everything is gone cleanly before the parent disappears. Slower but complete.

- `Orphan` — the parent is deleted but dependent resources are left alive, now with
  no owner. Use this when the parent should go but the children should keep running.

```yaml
spec:
  schedule: '0 0 * * *'
  deletionPropagationPolicy: 'Foreground'
```

> For most cleanup use cases like completed Jobs, stale pods. The default Background is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most cleanup use cases like completed Jobs or stale pods, the default Background is
```

> fine. Only think about this when cascade behavior matters.

Reviewer: Give an explanation of why end users should only think about this when cascade behaviour matters. Remember, some people might know why. But, many do not.

## Tracking deletions (the audit trail)

> Every time DeletingPolicy deletes something, Kyverno creates a **Kubernetes Event**. This

Reviewer: consider linking to Kubernestes documentation which explains what a Kubernetes Event is.

is the audit trail. If someone asks "who deleted that ConfigMap?" the answer is found here.

```bash
# See all deletion events across all namespaces
kubectl get events --field-selector reason=PolicyApplied -A

# See events in a specific namespace with details
kubectl get events -n <namespace> \
  -o custom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name,REASON:.reason,MESSAGE:.message

# Get full details of a specific event
kubectl get event <event-name> -n <namespace> -o yaml
```

The event tells exactly which policy fired (`involvedObject`), which resource was
deleted (`related`), and when it happened (`creationTimestamp`). Never lose track of
what Kyverno cleaned up.

## RBAC (the thing that will break silently if forgotten)

DeletingPolicy doesn't just run magically. The Kyverno cleanup controller needs
explicit permission to delete the resources being targeted.

> For some core resources on kind clusters, default permissions might already be there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some core resources on kind clusters for example, default permissions might already be there.
```

> For some core resources on kind clusters, default permissions might already be there.

Reviewer: Explain more about this. Specifically, what if default permissions don't exist? What do end users need to do or keep in mind if anything? Not everyone is using a kind cluster so please consider this and add more details as needed to help foster understanding.

For most things especially non-core resources, explicit RBAC is required.

If this error appears:

```text
pods is forbidden: cannot list resource "pods"
```

Create a ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding:

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: kyverno-cleanup-jobs
rules:
  - apiGroups: ['batch']
    resources: ['jobs']
    verbs: ['get', 'list', 'watch', 'delete']
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: kyverno-cleanup-jobs
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: kyverno-cleanup-jobs
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    name: kyverno-cleanup-controller
    namespace: kyverno
```

## **This is destructive**: the non-negotiable checklist

Every other policy type is recoverable. ValidatingPolicy blocks something, you can fix and
reapply. MutatingPolicy adds a label, you can remove it. GeneratingPolicy creates something, you can delete it.

> DeletingPolicy deletes things. There is no undo.

Reviewer: Consider making this comment bold and linking to documentation for each mentioned policy in this paragraph to show specifically how to recover conditions if things go in an unintended direction. Also, this is a good spot to remind folks to begin using policies in `Audit` mode and then move to `Enforce` once they have gotten everything working as intended. Explain how to do this and/or link to docs.
